<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>X</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-10" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">X</h2>
			<p>On the next evening after this there was a tea-meeting in Salem Chapel. In the back premises behind the chapel were all needful accommodations for the provision of that popular refreshment⁠—boilers, tea-urns, unlimited crockery and pewter. In fact, it was one of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Tozer’s boasts, that owing to the liberality of the “connection” in Carlingford, Salem was fully equipped in this respect, and did not need to borrow so much as a spoon or teapot, a very important matter under the circumstances. This, however, was the first tea-meeting which had taken place since that one at which <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Tufton’s purse had been presented to him, and the old pastor had taken leave of his flock. The young pastor, indeed, had set his face against tea-meetings. He was so far behind his age as to doubt their utility, and declared himself totally unqualified to preside over such assemblies; but, in the heat of his recent disappointment, when, stung by other people’s neglect, he had taken up Salem and all belonging to it into his bosom, a cruel use had been made of the young minister’s compliance. They had wrung a reluctant consent from him in that unguarded moment, and the walls of Carlingford had been for some days blazing with placards of the tea-meeting, at which the now famous (in Carlingford) lecturer on Church and State was to speak. Not Tozer, with all his eloquence, had been able to persuade the pastor to preside; but at least he was to appear, to take tea at that table elevated on the platform, where Phœbe Tozer, under the matronly care of <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Brown (for it was necessary to divide these honours, and guard against jealousy), dispensed the fragrant lymph, and to address the meeting. There had been thoughts of a grand celebration in the Music Hall to do more honour to the occasion; but as that might have neutralised the advantages of having all the needful utensils within themselves, convenience and economy carried the day, and the scene of these festivities, as of all the previous festivities of Salem, was the large low room underneath the chapel, once intended for a school, but never used, except on Sundays, in that capacity. Thither for two or three days all the “young ladies” of the chapel had streamed to and fro, engaged in decorations. Some manufactured festoons of evergreens, some concocted pink and white roses in paper to embellish the same. The printed texts of the Sunday school were framed, and in some cases obliterated, in Christmas garlands. Christmas, indeed, was past, but there were still holly and red berries and green smooth laurel leaves. The Pigeon girls, Phœbe Tozer, <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Brown’s niece from the country, and the other young people in Salem who were of sufficiently advanced position, enjoyed the preparations greatly⁠—entering into them with even greater heartiness than Lucy Wodehouse exhibited in the adornment of <abbr>St.</abbr> Roque’s, and taking as much pleasure in the task as if they had been picturesque Italians adorning the shrine of their favourite saint. Catterina and Francesca with their flower-garlands are figures worthy of any picture, and so is Lucy Wodehouse under the chancel arch at <abbr>St.</abbr> Roque’s; but how shall we venture to ask anybody’s sympathy for Phœbe and Maria Pigeon as they put up their festoons round the four square walls of the low schoolroom in preparation for the Salem tea-party? Nevertheless it is a fact that the two last mentioned had very much the same intentions and sensations, and amid the coils of fresh ivy and laurel did not look amiss in their cheerful labour⁠—a fact which, before the work was completed, had become perceptible to various individuals of the Carlingford public. But <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Vincent was, on this point, as on several others, unequal to the requirements of his position. When he did glance in for a moment of the afternoon of the eventful day, it was in company with Tozer and the <abbr>Rev.</abbr> <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Raffles of Shoebury, who was to take the chair. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Raffles was very popular in Carlingford, as everywhere. To secure him for a tea-meeting was to secure its success. He examined into all the preparations, tasted the cake, pricked his fingers with the garlands to the immense delight of the young ladies, and complimented them on their skill with beaming cheerfulness; while the minister of Salem, on the contrary, stalked about by his side pale and preoccupied, with difficulty keeping himself from that contempt of the actual things around to which youth is so often tempted. His mind wandered off to the companion of his last night’s walk⁠—to the stranger pacing up and down that damp garden with inscrutable unknown thoughts⁠—to the beautiful creature within those lighted windows, so near and yet so overwhelmingly distant⁠—as if somehow they had abstracted life and got it among themselves. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Vincent had little patience for what he considered the mean details of existence nearer at hand. As soon as he could possibly manage it, he escaped, regarding with a certain hopeless disgust the appearance he had to make in the evening, and without finding a single civil thing to say to the fair decorators. “My young brother looks sadly low and out of spirits,” said jolly <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Raffles. “What do you mean by being so unkind to the minister, Miss Phœbe, eh?” Poor Phœbe blushed pinker than ever, while the rest laughed. It was pleasant to be supposed “unkind” to the minister; and Phœbe resolved to do what she could to cheer him when she sat by his elbow at the platform table making tea for the visitors of the evening.</p>
			<p>The evening came, and there was not a ticket to be had anywhere in Carlingford: the schoolroom, with its blazing gas, its festoons, and its mottoes, its tables groaning with dark-complexioned plumcake and heavy buns, was crowded quite beyond its accommodation; and the edifying sight might be seen of Tozer and his brother deacons, and indeed all who were sufficiently interested in the success of Salem to sacrifice themselves on its behalf, making an erratic but not unsubstantial tea in corners, to make room for the crowd. And in the highest good-humour was the crowd which surrounded all the narrow tables. The urns were well filled, the cake abundant, the company in its best attire. The ladies had bonnets, it is true, but these bonnets were worthy the occasion. At the table on the platform sat <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Raffles, in the chair, beaming upon the assembled party, with cheerful little <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Tufton and <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Brown at one side of him, and Phœbe looking very pink and pretty, shaded from the too enthusiastic admiration of the crowd below by the tea-urn at which she officiated. Next to her, the minister cast abstracted looks upon the assembly. He was, oh, so interesting in his silence and pallor!⁠—he spoke little; and when anyone addressed him, he had to come back as if from a distance to hear. If anybody could imagine that <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Raffles contrasted dangerously with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Vincent in that reserve and quietness, it would be a mistake unworthy a philosophic observer. On the contrary, the Salem people were all doubly proud of their pastor. It was not to be expected that such a man as he should unbend as the reverend chairman did. They preferred that he should continue on his stilts. It would have been a personal humiliation to the real partisans of the chapel, had he really woke up and come down from that elevation. The more commonplace the ordinary “connection” was, the more proud they felt of their student and scholar. So <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Vincent leaned his head upon his hands and gazed unmolested over the lively company, taking in all the particulars of the scene, the busy groups engaged in mere tea-making and tea-consuming⁠—the flutter of enjoyment among humble girls and womankind who knew no pleasure more exciting⁠—the whispers which pointed out himself to strangers among the party⁠—the triumphant face of Tozer at the end of the room, jammed against the wall, drinking tea out of an empty sugar-basin. If the scene woke any movement of human sympathy in the bosom of the young Nonconformist, he was half ashamed of himself for it. What had the high mission of an evangelist⁠—the lofty ambition of a man trained to enlighten his country⁠—the warm assurance of talent which felt itself entitled to the highest sphere⁠—what had these great things to do in a Salem Chapel tea-meeting? So the lofty spirit held apart, gazing down from a mental elevation much higher than the platform; and all the people who had heard his lectures pointed him out to each other, and congratulated themselves on that studious and separated aspect which was so unlike other men. In fact, the fine superiority of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Vincent was at the present moment the very thing that was wanted to rivet their chains. Even <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Pigeon looked on with silent admiration. He was “high”⁠—never before had Salem known a minister who did not condescend to be gracious at a tea-meeting⁠—and the leader of the opposition honoured him in her heart.</p>
			<p>And even when at last the social meal was over, when the urns were cleared away, and with a rustle and flutter the assembly composed itself to the intellectual regale about to follow, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Vincent did not change his position. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Raffles made quite one of his best speeches; he kept his audience in a perpetual flutter of laughter and applause; he set forth all the excellencies of the new minister with such detail and fullness as only the vainest could have swallowed. But the pleased congregation still applauded. He praised <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Tufton, the venerable father of the community, he praised the admirable deacons; he praised the arrangements. In short, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Raffles applauded everybody, and everybody applauded <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Raffles. After the chairman had concluded his speech, the hero of the evening gathered himself up dreamily, and rose from Phœbe Tozer’s side. He told them he had been gazing at them this hour past, studying the scene before him; how strangely they appeared to him, standing on this little bright gaslighted perch amid the dark sea of life that surged round them; that now he and they were face to face with each other, it was not their social pleasure he was thinking of, but that dark unknown existence that throbbed and echoed around: he bade them remember the dark night which enclosed that town of Carlingford, without betraying the secret of its existence even to the nearest village; of those dark streets and houses which hid so many lives and hearts and tragic histories; he enlarged upon <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Hilyard’s idea of the sentiment of “such a night,” till timid people threw glances behind them, and some sensitive mothers paused to wonder whether the minister could have heard that Tommy had fallen into the fire, or Mary scalded herself, and took this way to break the news. The speech was the strangest that ever was listened to at a tea-party. It was the wayward capricious pouring forth of a fanciful young mind under an unquiet influence, having no connection whatever with the “object,” the place, or the listeners. The consequence was, that it was listened to with breathless interest⁠—that the faces grew pale and the eyes bright, and shivers of restrained emotion ran through the astonished audience. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Vincent perceived the effect of his eloquence, as a nursery storyteller perceives the rising sob of her little hearers. When he saw it, he awoke, as the same nursery minstrel does sometimes, to feel how unreal was the sentiment in his own breast which had produced this genuine feeling in others, and with a sudden amusement proceeded to deepen his colours and make bolder strokes of effect. His success was perfect; before he concluded, he had in imagination dismissed the harmless Salem people out of their very innocent recreation to the dark streets which thrilled round them⁠—to the world of unknown life, of which each man for himself had some knowledge⁠—to the tragedies that might be going on side by side with them, for aught they knew. His hearers drew a long breath when it was over. They were startled, frightened, enchanted. If they had been witnessing a melodrama, they scarcely could have been more excited. He had put the most dreadful suggestions in their mind of all sorts of possible trouble; he sat down with the consciousness of having done his duty by Salem for this night at least.</p>
			<p>But when Tozer got up after him to tell about the prosperity of the congregation, the anticlimax was felt even by the people of Salem. Some said, “No, no,” audibly, some laughed, not a few rose up and went away. Vincent himself, feeling the room very hot, and not disliking the little commotion of interest which arose on his departure, withdrew himself from the platform, and made his way to the little vestry, where a breath of air was to be had; for, January night as it was, the crowd and the tea had established a very high temperature in the under-regions of Salem. He opened the window in the vestry, which looked out upon the damp ground behind the chapel and the few gravestones, and threw himself down on the little sofa with a sensation of mingled self-reproach and amusement. Somehow, even when one disapproves of one’s self for doing it, one has a certain enjoyment in bewildering the world. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Vincent was rather pleased with his success, although it was only a variety of “humbug.” He entertained with Christian satisfaction the thought that he had succeeded in introducing a certain visionary uneasiness into the lively atmosphere of the tea-meeting⁠—and he was delighted with his own cleverness in spite of himself.</p>
			<p>While he lay back on his sofa, and pondered this gratifying thought, he heard a subdued sound of voices outside⁠—voices and steps that fell with but little sound upon the damp grass. A languid momentary wonder touched the mind of the minister: who could have chosen so doleful a retirement? It was about the last place in the world for a lover’s interview, which was the first thing that suggested itself to the young man; the next moment he started bolt upright, and listened with undisguised curiosity. That voice so different from the careless voices of Salem, the delicate refined intonations which had startled him in the shabby little room in Back Grove Street, awoke an interest in his mind which no youthful accents in Carlingford could have excited. He sat upright on the instant, and edged towards the open window. The gas burned low in the little vestry, which nobody had been expected to enter, and the illumination from all the schoolroom windows, and sounds of cheering and commotion there, had doubtless made the absolute darkness and silence behind seem perfectly safe to the two invisible people now meeting under the cloud of night. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Vincent was not startled into eavesdropping unawares, nor did he engage in any sophistical argument to justify himself for listening. On the contrary, he listened honestly, with the full intention of hearing all he could⁠—suddenly changed from the languid sentimentalist, painful and self-conscious, which the influences of the evening had made him, into a spectator very wide awake and anxious, straining his ear to catch some knowledge of a history, in which a crowd of presentiments warned him that he himself should yet be concerned.</p>
			<p>“If you must speak, speak here,” said that voice which Vincent had recognised: “it is scarcely the atmosphere for a man of your fine taste, to be sure; but considering the subject of the conference, it will do. What do you want with me?”</p>
			<p>“By Jove, it looks dangerous!⁠—what do you mean to suggest by this sweet rendezvous⁠—murder?” said the man, whoever he was, who had accompanied <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Hilyard to the damp yard of Salem Chapel, with its scattered graves.</p>
			<p>“My nerves are strong,” she answered. “It is a pity you should take the trouble to be melodramatic. Do you think I am vain enough to imagine that you could subject yourself to all the unpleasant accessories of being hanged on my account? Fancy a rough hempen rope, and the dirty fingers that would adjust it. Pah! you would not risk it for me.”</p>
			<p>Her companion swore a muttered oath. “By Jove! I believe you’d be content to be murdered, to make such an end of me,” he answered, in the baffled tone of rage which a man naturally sinks into when engaged in unequal conflict of recrimination with a woman.</p>
			<p>“This is too conjugal,” said <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Hilyard; “it reminds me of former experiences: come to the point, I beg of you. You did not come here and seek me out that we might have an amusing conversation⁠—what do you want with me?”</p>
			<p>“Don’t tempt me too far with your confounded impertinence,” exclaimed the man, “or there is no telling what may happen. I want to know where that child is; you know I do. I mean to reclaim my rights so far as she is concerned. If she had been a ward in Chancery, a man might have submitted. But I am a reformed individual⁠—my life is of the most exemplary description⁠—no court in Christendom would keep her from my custody now. I want the girl for her own good⁠—she shall marry brilliantly, which she never could do with you. I know she’s grown up as lovely as I expected⁠—”</p>
			<p>“How do you know?” interrupted <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Hilyard, with a certain hoarseness in her voice.</p>
			<p>“Ah! I have touched you at last. Remembering what her mother was,” he went on, in a mocking tone, “though I am grieved to see how much you have gone off in late years⁠—and having a humble consciousness of her father’s personal advantages, and, in short, of her relatives in general, I know she’s a little beauty⁠—and, by Jove, she shall be a duchess yet.”</p>
			<p>There was a pause⁠—something like a hard sob thrilled in the air, rather a vibration than a sound; and Vincent, making a desperate gesture of rage towards the schoolroom, from which a burst of applause at that moment sounded, approached closer to the window. Then the woman’s voice burst forth passionate, but subdued.</p>
			<p>“You have seen her! you!⁠—you that blasted her life before she was born, and confused her sweet mind forever⁠—how did you dare to look at my child? And I,” cried the passionate voice, forgetting even caution⁠—“<em>I</em>, that would give my life drop by drop to restore what never can be restored to that victim of your sin and my weakness⁠—I do not see her. I refuse myself that comfort. I leave it to others to do all that love and pity can do for my baby. You speak of murder⁠—man! if I had a knife, I could find it in my heart to put an end to your horrid career; and, look you, I will⁠—Coward! I will! I will kill you before you shall lay your vile hands on my child.”</p>
			<p>“She-wolf!” cried the man, grinding his teeth, “do you know how much it would be to my advantage if you never left this lonely spot you have brought me to? By Jove, I have the greatest mind⁠—”</p>
			<p>Another momentary silence. Vincent, wound up to a high state of excitement, sprang noiselessly to his feet, and was rushing to the window to proclaim his presence, when <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Hilyard’s voice, perfectly calm, and in its usual tone, brought him back to himself.</p>
			<p>“Second thoughts are best. It would compromise you horribly, and put a stop to many pleasures⁠—not to speak of those dreadful dirty fingers arranging that rough rope round your neck, which, pardon me, I can’t help thinking of when you associate your own name with such a vulgar suggestion as murder. <em>I</em> should not mind these little details, but <em>you</em>! However, I excited myself unreasonably, you have not seen her. That skilful inference of yours was only a lie. She was not at Lonsdale, you know.”</p>
			<p>“How the devil do you know I was at Lonsdale?” said her companion.</p>
			<p>“I keep myself informed of the movements of so interesting a person. She was not there.”</p>
			<p>“No,” replied the man, “she was not there; but I need not suggest to your clear wits that there are other Lonsdales in England. What if Miss Mildmay were in her father’s lawful guardianship now?”</p>
			<p>Here the air palpitated with a cry, the cry as of a wild creature in sudden blind anguish. It was echoed by a laugh of mockery and exultation. “Should you like me to tell you which of the Lonsdales you honoured with your patronage?” continued the mocking voice: “that in Derbyshire, or that in Devonshire, or that in Cumberland? I am afflicted to have defeated your skilful scheme so easily. Now that you see I am a match for you, perhaps you will perceive that it is better to yield peaceably, and unite with me in securing the girl’s good. She needs only to be seen to⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Who do you imagine you are addressing, Colonel Mildmay?” said <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Hilyard, haughtily; “there has been enough of this: you are mistaken if you think you can deceive me for more than a moment: my child is not in your hands, and never will be, please God. But mark what I say,” she continued, drawing a fierce, hard breath, “if you should ever succeed in tracing her⁠—if you should ever be able to snatch her from me⁠—then confess your sins, and say your last prayers, for as sure as I live you shall die in a week.”</p>
			<p>“She-devil! murderess!” cried her companion, not without a certain shade of alarm in his voice; “if your power were equal to your will⁠—”</p>
			<p>“In that case my power should be equal to my will,” said the steady, delicate woman’s voice, as clear in very fine articulation as if it were some peaceful arrangement of daily life for which she declared herself capable: “you should not escape if you surrounded yourself with a king’s guards. I swear to you, if you do what you say, that I will kill you somehow, by whatever means I can attain⁠—and I have never yet broken my word.”</p>
			<p>An unsteady defiant laugh was the only reply. The man was evidently more impressed with the sincerity, and power to execute her intentions, of the woman than she with his. Apparently they stood regarding each other for another momentary interval in silence. Again <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Hilyard was the first to speak.</p>
			<p>“I presume our conference is over now,” she said, calmly; “how you could think of seeking it is more than I can understand. I suppose poor pretty Alice, who thinks every woman can be persuaded, induced you to attempt this. Don’t let me keep you any longer in a place so repugnant to your taste. I am going to the tea-meeting at Salem Chapel to hear my young friend the minister speak: perhaps this unprofitable discussion has lost me that advantage. You heard him the other night, and were pleased, I trust. Good night. I suppose, before leaving you, I should thank you for having spared my life.”</p>
			<p>Vincent heard the curse upon her and her stinging tongue, which burst in a growl of rage from the lips of the other, but he did not see the satirical curtsy with which this strange woman swept past, nor the scarcely controllable impulse which made the man lift his stick and clench it in his hand as she turned away from him those keen eyes, out of which even the gloom of night could not quench the light. But even <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Hilyard herself never knew how near, how very near, she was at that moment to the unseen world. Had her step been less habitually firm and rapid⁠—had she lingered on her way⁠—the temptation might have been too strong for the man, maddened by many memories. He made one stride after her, clenching his stick. It was perfectly dark in that narrow passage which led out to the front of the chapel. She might have been stunned in a moment, and left there to die, without any man being the wiser. It was not virtue, nor hatred of bloodshed, nor repugnance to harm her, which restrained Colonel Mildmay’s hand: it was half the rapidity of her movements, and half the instinct of a gentleman, which vice itself could not entirely obliterate. Perhaps he was glad when he saw her disappear from before him down the lighted steps into the Salem schoolroom. He stood in the darkness and watched her out of sight, himself unseen by anyone, and then departed on his way, a splendid figure, all unlike the population of Grove Street. Some of the Salem people, dispersing at the moment, saw him sauntering down the street grand and leisurely, and recognised the gentleman who had been seen in the Music Hall with Lady Western. They thought he must have come privately once more to listen to their minister’s eloquence. Probably Lady Western herself, the leader of fashion in Carlingford, would appear next Sunday to do <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Vincent honour. The sight of this very fine gentleman picking his leisurely way along the dark pavement of Grove Street, leaning confidingly upon that stick over which his tall person swayed with fashionable languor, gave a climax to the evening in the excited imaginations of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Vincent’s admirers. Nobody but the minister and one utterly unnoted individual in the crowd knew what had brought the Colonel and his stick to such a place. Nobody but the Colonel himself, and the watchful heavens above, knew how little had prevented him from leaving a silent, awful witness of that secret interview upon the chapel steps.</p>
			<p>When <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Vincent returned to the platform, which he did hurriedly, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Pigeon was addressing the meeting. In the flutter of inquiries whether he was better, and gentle hopes from Phœbe that his studies had not been too much for him, nobody appeared to mark the eagerness of his eyes, and the curiosity in his face. He sat down in his old place, and pretended to listen to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Pigeon. Anxiously from under the shadow of his hands he inspected the crowd before him, who had recovered their spirits. In a corner close to the door he at last found the face he was in search of. <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Hilyard sat at the end of a table, leaning her face on her hand. She had her eyes fixed upon the speaker, and there passed now and then across the corners of her close-shut mouth that momentary movement which was her symbol for a smile. She was not <em>pretending</em> to listen, but giving her entire attention to the honest poulterer. Now and then she turned her eyes from Pigeon, and perused the room and the company with rapid glances of amusement and keen observation. Perhaps her eyes gleamed keener, and her dark cheek owned a slight flush⁠—that was all. Out of her mysterious life⁠—out of that interview, so full of violence and passion⁠—the strange woman came, without a moment’s interval, to amuse herself by looking at and listening to all those homely innocent people. Could it be that she was taking notes of Pigeon’s speech? Suddenly, all at once, she had taken a pencil out of her pocket and began to write, glancing up now and then towards the speaker. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Vincent’s head swam with the wonder he was contemplating⁠—was she flesh and blood after all, or some wonderful skeleton living a galvanic life? But when he asked himself the question, her cry of sudden anguish, her wild, wicked promise to kill the man who stole her daughter, came over his mind, and arrested his thoughts. He, dallying as he was on the verge of life, full of fantastic hopes and disappointment, could only pretend to listen to Pigeon; but the good poulterer turned gratified eyes towards <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Hilyard. He recognised her real attention and interest; was it the height of voluntary sham and deception?⁠—or was she really taking notes?</p>
			<p>The mystery was solved after the meeting was over. There was some music, in the first place⁠—anthems in which all the strength of Salem united, Tozer taking a heavy bass, while Phœbe exerted herself so in the soprano that <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Vincent’s attention was forcibly called off his own meditations, in terror lest something should break in the throat so hardly strained. Then there were some oranges, another speech, a hymn, and a benediction; and then <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Raffles sprang joyfully up, and leaned over the platform to shake hands with his friends. This last process was trying. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Vincent, who could no longer take refuge in silence, descended into the retiring throng. He was complimented on his speech, and even by some superior people, who had a mind to be fashionable, upon the delightful evening they had enjoyed. When they were all gone, there were still the Tozers, the Browns, the Pigeons, <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Tufton, and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Raffles. He was turning back to them disconsolate, when he was suddenly confronted by <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Hilyard out of her corner with the flyleaf of the hymnbook the unscrupulous woman had been writing in, torn out in her hand.</p>
			<p>“Stop a minute!” she cried; “I want to speak to you. I want your help, if you will give it me. Don’t be surprised at what I ask. Is your mother a good woman⁠—was it she that trained you to act to the forlorn as you did to me last night? I have been too hasty⁠—I take away your breath;⁠—never mind, there is no time to choose one’s words. The butterman is looking at us, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Vincent. The ladies are alarmed; they think I want spiritual consolation at this unsuitable moment. Make haste⁠—answer my question. Would she do an act of Christian charity to a woman in distress?”</p>
			<p>“My mother is⁠—yes, I know she would, what do you want of her?⁠—my mother is the best and tenderest of women,” cried Vincent, in utter amazement.</p>
			<p>“I want to send a child to her⁠—a persecuted, helpless child, whom it is the object of my life to keep out of evil hands,” said <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Hilyard, her dark thin face growing darker and more pallid, her eyes softening with tears. “She will be safe at Lonsdale now, and I cannot go in my own person at present to take her anywhere. Here is a message for the telegraph,” she added, holding up the paper which Vincent had supposed to be notes of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Pigeon’s speech; “take it for me⁠—send it off tonight⁠—you will? and write to your mother; she shall suffer no loss, and I will thank her on my knees. It is life or death.”</p>
			<p>“I know⁠—I am aware!” cried Vincent, not knowing what he said. “There is no time to be lost.”</p>
			<p>She put the paper into his hand, and clasped it tight between both of hers, not knowing in the excitement which she was so well trained to repress, that he had betrayed any special knowledge of her distress. It seemed natural, in that strain of desperation, that everybody should understand her. “Come tomorrow and tell me,” she said, hurriedly, and then hastened away, leaving him with the paper folded close into his hand as her hard grasp had left it. He turned away from the group which awaited his coming with some curiosity and impatience, and read the message by the light of one of the garlanded and festive lamps. “Rachel Russell to Miss Smith, Lonsdale, Devonshire. Immediately on receiving this, take the child to Lonsdale, near Peterborough⁠—to <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Vincent’s; leave the train at some station near town, and drive to a corresponding station on the Great Northern; don’t enter London. Blue veil⁠—care⁠—not to be left for an instant. I trust all to you.” <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Vincent put the message in his pocketbook, took it out again⁠—tried it in his purse, his waistcoat pocket, everywhere he could think of⁠—finally, closed his hand over it as at first, and in a high state of excitement went up to the chattering group at the little platform, the only thought in his mind being how to get rid of them, that he might hasten upon his mission before the telegraph office was closed for the night.</p>
			<p>And, as was to be expected, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Vincent found it no easy matter to get rid of the Tozers and Pigeons, who were all overflowing about the tea-party, its provisions, its speeches, and its success. He stood with that bit of paper clenched in his hand, and endured the jokes of his reverend brother, the remarks of <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Tufton, the blushes of Phœbe. He stood for half an hour at least perforce in unwilling and constrained civility⁠—at last he became desperate;⁠—with a wild promise to return presently, he rushed out into the night. The station was about half a mile out of Carlingford, at the new end, a long way past <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Rider’s. When Vincent reached it, the telegraph clerk was putting on his hat to go away, and did not relish the momentary detention; when the message was received and despatched, the young minister drew breath⁠—he went out of the office, wiping his hot forehead, to the railway platform, where the last train for town was just starting. As Vincent stood recovering himself and regaining his breath, the sudden flash of a match struck in one of the carriages attracted his attention. He looked, and saw by the light of the lamp inside a man stooping to light his cigar. The action brought the face, bending down close to the window, clearly out against the dark-blue background of the empty carriage; hair light, fine, and thin, in long but scanty locks⁠—a high-featured eagle-face, too sharp for beauty now, but bearing all the traces of superior good looks departed⁠—a light beard, so light that it did not count for its due in the aspect of that remarkable countenance⁠—a figure full of ease and haughty grace: all these particulars Vincent noted with a keen rapid inspection. In another moment the long leash of carriages had plunged into the darkness. With a strange flush of triumph he watched them disappear, and turned away with a smile on his lips. The message of warning was already tingling along the sensitive wires, and must outspeed the slow human traveller. This face, which so stamped itself upon his memory, which he fancied he could see pictured on the air as he returned along the dark road, was the face of the man who had been Lady Western’s companion at the lecture. That it was the same face which had confronted <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Hilyard in the dark graveyard behind Salem Chapel he never doubted. With a thrill of active hatred and fierce enmity which it was difficult to account for, and still more difficult for a man of his profession to excuse, the young man looked forward to the unknown future with a certainty of meeting that face again.</p>
			<p>We drop a charitable veil over the conclusion of the night. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Raffles and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Vincent supped at Pigeon’s, along with the Browns and Tozers; and Phœbe’s testimony is on record that it was a feast of reason and a flow of soul.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
